Hello everybody and welcome back.
In this lecture we are going to create a two additional bones.
And then as we switch over into post mode you'll see that they have custom shapes and the great thing
about these custom shapes is we know these are going to be control bones.
So let's go find out more Hello everybody and welcome back.
First of all let's turn on our overlays with the overlay so we see all this bone here in the lamp is
slightly rotated so let's select everything and alternate are and clear all rotations.
Excellent.
Now look from the side we need to create our bones.
Now I'm going to create the top bone and I'll leave you guys to create the bottom bone yourselves in
the challenge to create a bone an additive.
We're going to go into edit mode and we're going to select the end point of this bones of the head of
the bone and extrude out on the y axis.
Now because we've extruded from a head of a bone.
Now if we go ahead and start moving things around everything follows it and we we will want it to do
that but not in this way.
So we need to clear the parents of this bone so we go back into edit mode.
Alton Pei will clear parents and that's what we want to do at this point.
We want this to be a floating bone.
We could have if we wanted to just added another bone to our scene.
However it's much easier to extrude from this point because it's just that happens to be in exactly
the right position.
Now a press G and why I'm just moving away slightly and we will use that bone for the lamp to look at
it.
Now what about making it look custom.
Well let's go ahead and have a look in the bones properties itself.
You won't see this unless you impose mode.
So let's go ahead and pose mode and then if we scroll down going to minimize inverse Kana Mattox.
This is area under viewport display and you can set a custom object that you can say anything you'd
like here.
The reason why you might want to set a custom object is to distinguish our rigs controls from the rest
of the skeleton.
This enables you to just grab the bits you want in order to control and later on.
It means that we can potentially hide these from our seam can go ahead select them go hide select them
go hide and then all of that will will need do is grab this bone here and it won't look like a bone.
It'll look like something else in the moment and move that's around in order to control our lamp.
Now of course one of the problems is how well I've just hidden all my bones how to go and select them
again you could undo but let's say you'd saved and come back Alton H.
We'll show those bones again.
And so if you wanted to have them selected I could arrest H to hide them as well.
So alternate you bring them back.
So what were we doing.
We've got this control bone that we're going to look with.
So let's name it look.
Because that's what it's all about and we don't actually have an object yet that we could use for it.
Now I'm going to use a very simple object so I'm going to create myself cursor it's a world origin and
I'm going to create a mesh object a cylinder now a cone would be much better.
Now let's go ahead select this again.
Go into pose mode and scroll all the way down custom objects we're going to set it to the cone.
Now that doesn't look any good does it.
Doesn't really show us the direction we're looking.
So I can grab the cone once again but we need to be an object mode to do so.
The actual cone mesh object.
I'm going to go in edit mode so we can see what was going on live.
So if I rotate that's on the x axis by 90 degrees or minus 90 we see at the very top left as we're rotating
it round is going to be minus 90 so let's type in minus 90.
Now it's not quite right at the moment it seems to have rotated all the way down here and not around
its origin so let's have a look at what it's rotating around is a medium points.
I'm not quite sure what it is rotating around then.
So let's change that.
Let's change its pivot point to the 3d cursor.
Before we do that rotation there we go that's perfect.
So that's going to rotate on the x axis by minus 90.
That's be precise.
Press X again.
Excellent.
Hey.
Pun not intended.
I'm just going to scale that down and move it slightly on the y axis the global y axis so we're gonna
press again to roughly where the bone was.
I can't see the bone any more it's been replaced with this.
Now one of the things will happen is when you put your arm which your selected you go into a pose mode
you'll see everything as it is.
If you go into edit mode it will revert back to being a normal bone which makes sense but I'm happy
with where that is and what it looks like.
Brilliant.
Okay.
I'm finally I'm not going to leave as a solid object.
I'm once again going to go down and turn on wireframe mode.
So we see a viewport display wireframe then you can see through it and then the final thing I want to
do is grab my cone itself in object mode.
This one here I'm going to rename it's to bone shape cone or bone shape.
Look look.
There we go.
That's good.
And then finally I'm just going to press H to hide out the scenes that's nice and hidden.
There we go.
We've got our first bone at the top.
All sorted.
I'm going to go solid shaded boats so we can just see saw our first bone is all set up and sorted.
And now of course comes your challenge and your challenge is to create a controlled bone from the tail
of the stem bone.
Now do check that the bone that you've created is not connected.
Remember to name the bone as well something appropriate.
Whether that's roots or base something along those lines.
And then finally create a custom shape for the bone as well.
Paul's video now and give that a go
Hello everybody and welcome back.
Okay let's hop on over into blender and create our other control bone OK.
So let's go into edit mode because we need to add a new bone.
I'm going to go to side the side projection.
I'm gonna grab the tail of the stem bone extrude it out lock it to the y axis so it's nice and flat
now won't actually matter how big this is.
I'm going to select the bone as well and just press G to move it around.
That is not connected to any of the rest of our model which is very useful.
So we don't have to clear the parents in this case.
Okay.
The next thing we need to do is create our custom shape and then we can apply it says go ahead.
What do I want my custom shape to be.
I think I'm just going to go for a circle.
I did not mean to add another bone because I didn't come out of edit mode.
There we go.
So I'm still at the center of the scene.
I'm going to add in a mesh circle now the circle itself has too many vertices at the moment I'm going
to set it down at eight I could have set this a bit lower as well to be quite honest but no worries
we don't need to do anything.
And I'm going to lever it's just a rim I'm not going to add a feel to it and then it will naturally
be a wireframe anyway.
In fact we could do just saves us a bit of work basically.
Now that's there we can go and hopefully select all bone go into pose mode scroll down custom object
circle.
Now of course the problem with custom objects circle I'm going to search for it because it's going to
be the only one called circle on it there's lots of circles but here we go just this custom one here
circle I can hide it but the other thing is it's just called circle so I can call this control own base
now I don't think I've named my bone as of yet so let's go back and edit mode select the bone scroll
all the way up.
Yes it's called lamp stem one do make sure just call it bone base again.
So that's a really important to make sure that you go through and just check your naming on all of these.
It's very easy to just plow forward with your projects and completely forget to do something basic like
naming and a while smaller projects you're likely to get away with it but if you keep that habit what
will end up it will just come back and bite you in the backside if you're not careful on a much larger
projects.
I've had it before I was doing something that had a lot of repeated patterns in it and I just lost my
place and it was so difficult trying to rectify that.
It almost felt quicker to just restart the project.
Anyway I'm digressing and you guys let's see where you're getting to now what kind of shapes did you
use for your control bones that switched back over to pose mode.
I've got a simple cone and a circle.
What did you choose share over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.